# x86 101

## Why?

You might be wondering why I would subject myself to torture by trying to learn Assembly in the first place since it's "either too hard" or  "it's boring as hell". Well you're right, it's definitely not the most interesting thing in the world. Since I'm taking a course of offensive security, I *kinda* need to at least understand the basics of it -- mainly to understand program disassembling for CTF.

So far, there aren't too many simple guides on learning x86 online compared to other languages. So hopefully, this will be a quick and easy guide for you to follow  to learn the very basics of x86. :smile:

## What is x86?

*Worse than MIPS*. Just kidding. x86 is a variant of **Assembly** that is commonly written for x86-64 processors which are CISC processors (common in most desktop computers today). x86 is more complex than, let's say, MIPS in the sense that it is designed to complete tasks with only a few instructions rather than using more basic instructions.

For example, CISC architectures come with a built-in instruction that performs multiplication without breaking it up into a series of smaller instructions. In the RISC approach, multiplication is actually broken up into a series of a few instructions [2]. 

```asm
; CISC approach
; Imagine if dval1 = 0x5 and dval2 = 0x6
mov eax, dval1 ; Move the first value to accumulator
mul dval2 ; Multiply into eax
```

In the RISC approach, it is broken up into a series of other steps.

```asm
LOAD A, 2
LOAD B, 3
PROD A, B
STORE A, RES
```

## Program Components

Before we get started with the x86 language, first we must understand the main sections of a program written in C. This will be a very brief guide since there is plenty of info online. Note that what I will be talking about is the 32-bit variant of the x86 architecture.

#### Heap

The **heap** is a section of **unmanaged** memory (in Java, there's GC so technically it is managed there) that is allocated by the operating system. The OS uses the `sysbrk` syscall to allocate memory from the requesting function. Unlike the stack, memory is not invalidated when the function returns which leads to memory leaks. To avoid this, in C you would release memory with `free()` after a call to `malloc()` or one of its variants. Heap grows **upward** towards higher memory addresses.

#### Stack

This refers to the region of memory that is allocated to the process **primarily to implement functions**. This is managed in the sense that the variables created remain local to the function it resides and is invalidated once the function exits (when the [stack pointer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stack_register) moves up). The values are still there, but they will be overwritten by the contents of the next function call's [stack frame](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10057443/explain-the-concept-of-a-stack-frame-in-a-nutshell). Two x86 registers that deal with this are:

 * `esp` (extended stack pointer) - points to the top of the stack where `push` and `pop` will decrement and increment the stack pointer respectively. `push` adds an element to the top of the stack while `pop` removes the element at the top of the stack.
 * `ebp` (extended base pointer) - points to the start of the current **stack frame**, which is the space allocated for a function call. The `call` instruction pushes the current instruction pointer onto the stack.

Note that the stack grows **downward** towards lower memory addresses. This is also where global and static variables are declared.

#### Registers

These are small storage units located directly in the processor for quick access to intermediate values in function calls. It is known as L0 cache and it is located at the highest level in the [memory hierarchy](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/memory-hierarchy-design-and-its-characteristics/).

There are six 32-bit general purpose registers in the x86 architecture [3]:

 * `eax` (extended accumulator register) - used for storing return values for functions and special register for certain calculations.

    * ```asm
      mov eax, 3  ; Set eax to 3
      ret			; Return
      ```

 * `ebx` (extended base register) - often set to commonly used values to speed up calculations.

 * `ecx` (extended counter register) - used as a function parameter or a loop counter. Generally used with *for loops* as the counter.

 * `edx` (extended data register) - also used as a function parameter register like `ecx` and storing **short-term variables** within a function.

 * `esi` (extended source index register) - register that points to the where the "source" is located in memory.

 * `edi` (extended data index register) - similar to `esi`, but it points to the destination. 

`ebp`, `esp`, and `eip` are all known as **reserved** registers.

#### Instructions

##### Format

* [Talking about AT&T and Intel Syntax]

##### Dereferencing

* Bracket notation

## Math

## Stack Based Operators

## Lea

## Compare

## Jump

## Call

## Ret



## References

1. [x86-64 Assembly Language Programming with Ubuntu](http://www.egr.unlv.edu/~ed/assembly64.pdf)

2. [2](https://cs.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/courses/soco/projects/risc/risccisc/)

3. [3](https://wiki.skullsecurity.org/index.php?title=Registers)

   